Thank you very much.
I'd like to acknowledge the honorable members of the Justice Select Committee, Mr.
Chair, ladies and gentlemen in attendance, good morning.
I'm Miguel, a citizen of a country called New Zealand, and to borrow some words
from the former Prime Minister, Rob Muldoon, "An honorary bloke."
I would like to commence this oral presentation by discharging my utmost gratitude
for the allocation of time and indeed lending your ears as I speak on the English
Language Bill. I do hope and pray that you may find this presentation enlightening,
albeit the brevity of time.
Can I just say that the English language has been the language of commerce
worldwide, and indeed a lingua franca of this nation.
However, alas and alack, English has not been recognized an official language
even after the recognition of the two official languages on separate
occasions. Namely Te Reo Māori in 1987 and New Zealand
Sign Language in 2006.
Lest we forget,
two versions of the Treaty of Waitangi were written both in English and Te Reo
Māori. Hence, it is appropriate that English should be recognized an official
language before it becomes a second-rate language in this nation, given
that New Zealand, alas, is becoming a cultural melting pot.
This bill seeks to correct the anomaly, providing consistency in legal
framework in clarifying the status of all three languages in
statute. This bill
does not diminish the status of the two other official languages, because if it
isn't the case, then pray tell me as to which clause from the legislation states
the revocation of the two other official languages.
Rather, English will be on the same pedestal alongside those,
therefore acknowledging the linguistic reality of this nation and
affirming the value of the English language as a medium of instruction
used by the mass majority of the population.
Some people may argue as to how this legislation addresses domestic issues that we
currently face, and my question to them is: how did, quote,
"New Zealanders, Māori and tangata Tiriti alike, live their lives in peace,"
end of quote, as per the compulsion of Te Reo Māori in workforce, or by
changing every bureau's names, essential services, or road signs into Te Reo
during the height of pandemia? Did those sorts of tokenisms at the time
manage to, quote, "Put food on the table?
Did it provide a damn roof over one's head,
a decent income, or a place to belong?" end of quote.
In short, addresses the domestic issues at the time.
I commend this legislation to the House with great alacrity, and shall expect the
House for reciprocity.
There you go.
God defend New Zealand, and God save the King.
Thank you very much.
Right. Questions, members?
Mr Chair.
Right. Thank you. Hey, that's very good.
And we've read them all, so that's very helpful. Thank you.
Once again, thank you very much.
Sure.
Thank you.
Right. Now, Mr Josh Hatfield. Halford.
That's you, cool? We've got five minutes with you.
I know you've just come in. Just use your time wisely, but
most of us will have questions. Okay.
So,
I'm
here to register my opposition to the bill, as if you've read
my written submission you'll know.
I have a number of reasons for opposing this legislation.
But in the first instance, I just feel it's not necessary, and also that it
cheapens the status of our current official languages.
And beyond that, it also effectively alters how we define
an official language,
which I just find to be unnecessary.
And in addition to that, the rhetoric behind this bill
seems to me to be confused at best, and perhaps even
actively disingenuous.
And I want to reference some of the speeches that were made in the House during the
first reading of this bill,
which would suggest to
an untrained listener that there was some plague of ambulances getting lost and
boats hitting rocks and chandeliers falling off ceilings as a result of Māori
being an official language, and those were all things that were said in speeches
on the first reading of this bill.
I find this very hard to believe.
I have never been confused by bilingual signage or maps or
correspondence or anything like that.
Nor have my
friends and relatives who visit from Australia.
Nor indeed, have my grandparents who
immigrated here from India in the 1980s or late
1970s, and who have struggled with English at times.
They have not at any time struggled to comprehend
bilingual signage or kura and school, for example.
Yeah.
The fact is that all official signage, or most all, is
bilingual,
if not more, and it
is accompanied with pictograms. It is designed to be very easy to read.
There is no push to eliminate the word school from signage or
anything of that sort,
and I think fears of this are ultimately overblown.
Putting the rhetoric to one side, though, I'm concerned that by ascribing official
language to English,
what we do is cheapen the status of Te Reo Māori and sign language,
which were designated as official languages precisely because
their existence was under existential threat if they weren't supported.
I don't think I need to tell the committee about how
historically, Te Reo Māori especially has been-- There's been attempts
to effectively stamp it out. And
that was one of the reasons that this was designated as an official language.
I'd hate to see a return to that in any way.
Ultimately, English is not under threat.
The fact that I'm submitting to you in English and you don't need a translator,
and I don't need a translator to hear your questions,
hopefully,
mean that I don't feel that English is ultimately under threat.
We don't need, say, an English language week.
We don't need to
give it the same official status that these other two languages have.
If, for example, there were to be an extra clause in this
bill-denoting that English is the official language of the
business of government, and that Te Reo Māori and Sign
Language retained a special status,
then that would assuage some of my concerns.
But ultimately, I think
what this bill is effectively doing is confusing.
The de facto state of affairs is that English is already essentially the official
language of New Zealand. And
to say that we need to
are in effect protected languages rather than
official languages. Now, I don't necessarily object to all the
business of government being conducted trilingually, but I suspect that's not
really the purpose of this bill.
And as I said,
yeah, it ultimately is just not really a necessary bit of legislation.
The other part is that this bill is potentially deceptively simple.
It's only, I believe, five clauses,
and that may make it seem like it has very few effects.
But I think this simplicity
is also in effect a bit of a vice because it means that
the bill doesn't tackle the results of
itself. It doesn't
provide any mechanism for Te Reo Māori and Sign Language to remain,
in effect, protected languages or special languages that we ultimately
designate as such because they would be under threat if they weren't actively
supported
by government.
And yeah, so for those reasons, I want to register my opposition to the bill,
especially in its current form, and I'll be happy to take questions if any members
of the committee have them.
Okay, Mr. Tom Rutherford.
Hey. Thank you, Josh. Really appreciated your submission.
My question would be, what's the
fear that you hold by making English an official
language? Do you think that once it's made an official language,
then there would be a threat, say, to Te Reo in
New Zealand? Because that's sort of what I'm collecting from the
submission that you've made.
I think
rather than there being an immediate threat to Te Reo, I
think what it does is it cheapens the protected
status that Te Reo has. And also, it means that,
I've listened to the rhetoric around this bill.
Ultimately, a lot of it seems to be focused on there basically
being, "too much Te Reo",
especially some of the speeches in the first reading of this bill.
And whilst making English an official language obviously isn't going to
suddenly erase Te Reo Māori or Sign Language,
the speeches and the rhetoric and the rationale from
those who are putting this bill forward suggests to me that the ultimate
intention is to reduce the prevalence of a
language that I feel would be under threat if we weren't actively protecting it.
Okay. Now I've got a question from Mr. Jamie Arbuckle.
Thank you, Josh.
My question is about that first reading and the
references that some people made to being in areas where
they couldn't understand, and there wasn't English
there.
And you're saying for yourself, you can navigate.
Could you say for others that they do find it difficult to navigate?
Because that was quite a genuine issue around
being stranded in a bay or outside a bay and not being able to
find, I think, emergency services.
But it's different for everyone. Can you understand the difference?
Well, I'm yet to see an example of, say, an official
marine chart or a map or a street sign which
has a Māori
word and doesn't have-
Make that harder
... some kind of translation or
pictogram, which makes it fairly obvious what that means.
For your example of being stuck in a bay, I'm no boatie,
but
my understanding of any official map is that it's designed to
be readable and
that ultimately those who design the charts aren't actively looking to
make them more complicated and confuse boaties
by adding Māori for the sake of it and erasing
English. I don't believe that that's the case.
And listen, if you could show me an example of that, I'd be prepared to
accept that and-
Okay
... yeah, but yeah.
All right. Hey, thank you for joining us this morning. Very helpful.
It's good to have. Right. Now we've got Mr.
Xu is-
Yu.
Oh, right. Good morning, Mr. Xu.
Good morning. Yu, actually. Yeah.
Sorry?
Yu Zhuo. Yeah, Yu Zhuo.
Oh, sorry. Okay.
It's all right. Yeah.
Very nice to have you with us this morning. We've got five minutes with you.
Yeah. Good morning, and thanks for the opportunity for me
to speak here today. My name is Yu Zhuo, and I'm
a chartered accountant in public practice, and I studied,
worked here for more than 15 years.
And I would really like to express my support to this
English Language Bill. And I view this bill as
really just ensuring the communications, especially
public communication, in New Zealand remain quite
clear,
accessible, and efficient for the widest group possible.
And I believe this bill can really improve that.
I'm speaking really from my own personal experience as
well as the discussions I had with my friends,
families, as well as the communities around me I
have observed, and almost all of them
showed a surprise, if it's not a shock, that
when they learned English is not the official language of
New Zealand.For many residents
and migrants like myself who really rely on English as
our primary and possibly the only working
language, so clear, consistent
use of English, especially in the public space,
really just reduce the confusion and then improve the
accessibility across
the public.
Especially in recent years,
I noticed many, many official websites, road
signs, public buildings,
they're all mixing Maori and English.
And in some cases, Maori are presented in a very large
bold
format, while English presented in a very tiny,
thin format and very less visible.
This really created confusion and require extra
effort to navigate through.
I'm not saying that, oh, yeah, there's no English being presented.
It is, websites are presenting them, but it's just
less accessible, visible, and then created
real barriers. And I believe government
information should be immediately sort of comprehensible
to the largest possible audience.
And based on the data available
online, that only around 5% of
the New Zealand population use Maori on a daily
basis. So this just means
most
New Zealand public just simply can't understand
Maori, and especially when it is used in the official
context.
And then in practice, this really creates real barriers,
and people just have to, like myself, have to pause,
interpretate, seek clarifications,
as well as
just
check out what is this piece of information.
Where's the English translate?
And over time, this really creates
extra effort and barriers.
And I also-
Sorry, I've got some questions. So-
Yeah
Is that all right?
Yeah, of course.
Right. First one from Ms. Camilla Village.
Yeah.
Thank you. Thanks for your submission.
I just had a question around some of the things that you've said in your oral
submission, also in your written submission about the bill being able to provide
greater clarity.
This bill is very simple and only really-
Yeah
... asserts English as an official language.
Is your view or your submission that there should be more done to make sure
that the English that is published is more easily
accessible or understood by people?
Are you saying that there should be more
put into making sure that there is clear language used?
For this bill, I do believe it's a good step to start
because at the moment, I don't view where things are
kind of
getting crazy. I have to say that . Yeah.
But it's a good step to start
so that English, especially when I talk to some
of other peoples or they can just say, "Oh, yeah, because Maori is the official
language, then why not just having everything in Maori?" Yeah.
Right. Quick question from Dr. Sunan.
Hi. Thank you so much for your submission.
I have a question because you mentioned signage, and obviously this is something
that I have conversations with within the Chinese communities as
well. Would you then consider it then
confusing and would remove, for example, old use of
Chinese language in signage at airports and et cetera, because it is
also bilingual there and therefore could have the potential of
causing confusion?
I think that's a little bit two different story.
When you're putting the signs-
Oh.
Yeah, when you're putting the signs and public information, you do need
to consider what's your audience really.
In the international airport, I've seen not just
Chinese there, I see other language there.
So, in airport, the audience really is just
the wide international travelers.
While for general public here in New Zealand, that
95%, were
majority using English. So the government do need to
consider
what's the audience of this piece of information really try to protect.
Could you name me another country where-
No.
the official language isn't on signage?
That's enough. We're out of time, sorry.
Oh, okay.
Hey, thank you. Sorry. We're well over time, so we've got to move on.
So thank you for your submission this morning.
Yeah, my pleasure.
It's been very short. Okay.
Cheers.
Now, we've got
Ms. Diane Downward. I see you're on screen.
Good morning. We've got five minutes with you.
We've all read your submission, so maybe leave a little bit of time for
questions.
Yeah, hopefully there'll be time.
So I don't think that language needs to be under
threat to be made official. There are many reasons for language to be an
official, and I listed a few in my written feedback.
One of the most compelling is for social cohesion.
The Royal Commission into the March 15th shooting talks a lot about the importance
of social cohesion. And how are we to be a united nation if we can't
speak to one another in a common language?
Some will say we already use English as a common language, so why do we need this
bill? Well, to emphasize the fact that although other languages,
Chinese, Hindu, Maori, Arabic, whatever, are equally
capable languages- languagesEnglish is the historical
language of our laws, commerce, science, medicine, and society in
general, and therefore needs to be recognized as our common language by
making it official. New Zealand is rapidly changing with
immigration, bringing many new languages and cultures, producing growing
communities where English is rarely spoken or used, creating
societies within societies. This is the antithesis of
social cohesion. Canada, where I was born, has two
official languages which are never mixed together, but each
printed separately, side by side, or in separate papers.
The reason for this is to circumvent bad interpretations, so
there is clarity and unity of understanding of the concepts put forward.
Growing up, I was friends with a first generation Italian, and witnessed a
subtle form of control of the father over the mother through
language. He needed to learn and speak English in order to
work. But she was a stay-at-home mom, and after many years could barely
speak more than a few words to her children's friends, relying on her
children to be interpreters for her.
This lack of language skills fettered her in her social life, and she was
only able to have friends with other Italians.
How many new New Zealanders, especially women, find themselves enslaved
in the old customs and traditions of the country they've fled,
unable to communicate freely with those from outside their language?
Understanding our laws and social norms is very important.
I have been a member of the Interfaith Society since 2018, spending five years
as its president. Our aim has been to build bridges of understanding between
religions. I do not fear others' worldviews, but know the value of
one law for all to avoid conflict between groups and the various values,
cultural norms that exist. Our laws underpin our
social norms. I remember a conversation I had with a member who had
already lived here for 20 years, and he claimed they could do whatever they
wanted because there was religious freedom in New Zealand.
I pointed out that they had religious freedom
within the laws of New Zealand,
as stated
in this book, laid here, by Jacinda Ardern in the
forward of the statement on this book,
religious diversity in New Zealand.
Hey, Diane, I've got a question for you. So we're just running out of time.
Okay. So the importance is that
we need to
have our most common language, English, and I would like to see it taken a step
further, that everyone learn the rights, responsibilities, and fundamental laws of
this nation so they can integrate and be part of the social fabric,
building social cohesion, and not creating a separate society within.
And I just wanted to leave you with a story from Nikki Wagner, told me when she was
still an MP. She said they had to quickly pass a bill to make forced
marriage and underage marriage illegal in New Zealand.
Both sides of the house were in agreement and passed it quickly without fanfare,
and it was found that such a bill was necessary when it was discovered the reason
some primary-aged, under 12 girls were no longer
attending school because they had been married off to older men in their community.
The police couldn't do anything before the bill was passed because there was no law
preventing young girls being married off by their parents.
Such a bill was never needed before because it was a social norm that
parents would protect their children from underage sexual activity and not force
them into a life of servitude. We need this for social
cohesion.
All right. Hey, thank you for that. But unfortunately, we've run out of time.
But thank you for your submission this morning.
Okay. Thank you.
Right. We're going to Mr. Owen Hughes.
You've been waiting patiently down there. Please come to the front.
Just please leave us some time for questioning, otherwise it just gets cut
out.
Sure.
Good morning.
Okay. My original submission made three
recommendations,
but I now only want to make one recommendation.
Good.
Okay, so cross out recommendations one and two.
And what I'd like to see is just a new section
in this act
called interpretation, with the wording being, "For the purpose of this
act, English means English that is clear,
consistent, well-organized, and appropriate for the intended
audience."
So that is my recommendation.
Right. Cool.
And I did say in my original one that I thought plain
language should be explicitly referenced in the bill, but I
don't think that now. I don't think that's necessary.
Right. Cool. You're raising a very important... I'm going to go to Mr.
Todd Stevenson.
Well, thanks for clarifying your submission.
It's great because I was going to ask, yeah, because plain obviously could have a
lot of different meanings. But thank you, and it's obviously very clear that
you want English defined as being clear, concise,
well-organized, and appropriate. Why do you think that's important?
I think it's important because often it doesn't happen.
Yeah.
It's particularly important in the justice system-
Yeah
... where an enormous amount of time is spent on litigation
about what this particular word means.
So-
Yeah
... yeah, clear and consistent communication is
good.
I suppose it gives rise-
Gobbledygook is bad. It has to go.
I suppose it gives rise,
in some of the submissions, we make this difference between New Zealand English, US
English, English English or British English.
Are you proposing this as a way
to get around that, but also to aid understanding?
Is that the intent behind this primary submission of yours?
That's right. I think what I'm proposing is consistent with the purpose of the
bill, which is to send a high-level message.
Right. Very good.
The bill doesn't require people to do anything,
and
What my suggestion would result in,
it won't cost anything to implement, and it'll save money because it'll save a
whole lot of time.
Very good. Hey, thank you for your submission.
Very pertinent and concise. That's exactly what we like.
Hey, thank you very much.
Thank you.
I'm now going to
Reo Pol Limited, and we're going to talk to Dr
Vincent
Olsen-Reeder. How are you? Good morning.
Good morning.
Good morning, Honorable Chair and the committee.
Thank you for your time today. I'm going to try and race as fast as I
can. A language is typically made official not to control
citizens, but to control the state.
The Te Reo Motu Reo Māori 2016 is an example of that.
Its spirit and intent convey how the state is to control its penchant for the
erasure of te reo Māori.
Any sociolinguist will tell you the way a government controls itself around
language and instead pitches support for language to its citizens matters.
The state sets the tone for citizens from the top down.
The National Party and the Māori Coalition Government set excellent language
planning and policy cogs in 2016, and work continued
on these into 2023 or so. They are logical,
rational, evidence-based, and cost-effective settings that drive the
nation forward in the way citizens want.
Which is, of course, exactly what effective government is supposed to
do. Reo Pol is deeply concerned citizens have had
this aspiration ignored and demeaned for almost three years now,
only for this bill to threaten even more restriction.
But it's not just about citizens. In 2025, a commission of inquiry
report outlined how the public service has cast political neutrality and
maintenance of the law aside in favor of English-only
stipulations contained within a coalition agreement, a party
document no public servant has any business entertaining.
Reo Pol understands undocumented and unappropriated taxpayer funds
have even been spent on executing the erasure of te reo Māori in favor of
English.
But even without inappropriate political interference, the state still makes poor
choices for our official languages that it should not be making.
And I'm sorry to say, even this committee discarded an undisclosed number of
written submissions on the Treaty Principles Bill unread because they were
written in Māori.
Anyone can say the extravagance English receives now and the
disregard for our actual official languages by the state is in
constant contradiction with law, policy, and citizen reality.
In its written submission, Reo Pol provides you options to at least fix the bill if
it was to progress. Without those elements, it must be
abandoned.
I'd like the committee to reflect on the tens of thousands of New Zealanders who
spent decades fighting for the officialization of te reo Māori and
NZSL through failed bills, having dogs set after them,
enduring beatings in the Wellington train station, and exposure to indecent
state medical testing.
It is an insult to every single one of those citizens that this bill, no
longer than a GST receipt, should attempt to try and claim equal
status for English.
Today, members of the NZSL community celebrate the 20th
anniversary of the New Zealand Sign Language Act, which was signed on the
5th of April
2006.
On this day, and on the 5th of April, every Crown official should be
reflecting on that act, and I am sad that this committee is
instead considering whether to allow the biggest threat that act has ever
faced safe passage through.
Reo Pol asks you to return the bill to the House and recommend it be
abandoned. Thank you.
Right. I'm going to go to Mr
Dan Rosewarne first of all.
Thank you.
Yeah.
And thanks for that submission.
Morning.
I was just interested to know what ways could this bill
unintentionally diminish the status of the practical use of te reo
Māori?
That's an excellent question. At the moment, we do have quite a lot
of change in society as a result of the current
rhetoric around the use of te reo Māori.
It's changing how citizens treat other citizens in playgrounds, for
example. That's a citizen issue, but there's also the public
service issue which I've mentioned, where we've got the erasure of te reo
Māori in public agencies that, in my opinion,
is in contradiction with law and policy. Yeah.
Okay. Mr Todd Stevenson.
Thanks. Just a point of clarification to make sure you're understanding.
Sure.
This committee actually-- I was actually the MP that made sure that every
submission on the Treaty Principles Bill was made a part of the public record,
even after the bill was reported back. Just so there's no misunderstanding.
Thank you. That's not on the public record.
Well-
The public record is different.
Okay. I just want to make sure you understood that.
So we were-
Yeah.
But actually, my question is-
I understand the public record, yeah
... yeah. You say that they're all there.
Yes, the public record, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah. That was the decision of this committee.
So I just wanted to-- Because I think maybe what
you're talk-- We had this earlier, right?
Te reo and sign language being really considered protected languages.
Is that really your submission? Because I think some of this could be
actually just around-
Interpretation
...
yeah, understanding and interpretation because I think-
I follow
... one submitter earlier said that's kind of how he viewed them, which I think is
totally reasonable, as protected languages.
Obviously, they're legislated as official languages, but I just want to get your
view on that.
Yes. So protected languages absolutely in legislation, but it's more than
that. What we
should be looking to do with the current policy cogs that we have, the mechanisms
we have at the moment, is a return to what we used to have, which was a
multilingual government broadcasting sector, education sector,
and communities were multilingual too.
With the added addition of New Zealand Sign Language, we should be looking to
be completely trilingual.
All right. Hey, thank you very much for your submission.
Thank you for your input.
Right. Now,
everyone, I'm going to ask you to leave to clear the
room, I think.
Can I ask you all to leave? It's going to be right
be-Don't
wander off. Right. Where is...
All right.
Good.
I wouldn't like to be accused of impersonating Robert Bailey.
Good morning,
Honorable Dr. Nick Smith. Have you got some
other colleagues with you?
Yes, I'm expecting to be joined-
Right
... by the President of LGNZ-
Yeah
... but not until,
there's a five-minute submission I understand of my own.
Okay. All right, cool.
And then a submission with LGNZ, Mr. Chairman.
All right. The floor is yours.
Well, look, firstly, can I acknowledge you as chair, and good
friend, Andrew Bailey, and the other members of
the committee. Really appreciate the flexibility of your committee with me
having a council meeting today to be able to make this short, sharp submission.
I just have a very simple, very concerning submission,
effectively saying that postal voting in our council
elections is on life support. And really want the
committee in your review of the election to understand
how serious the situation has become.
If we look at the postal volumes, you'd be familiar, they were over
1.1 billion, they're now under 200 million.
We've had New Zealand Post further close the number of boxes
that are available in our communities for people to vote.
And I think it's also really important for you to understand the
increased risk of fraud in our local
elections because people are receiving the post a lot
less frequently, so that they are sitting in the mailbox for
longer,
and there is an increasing number of people that simply do not
receive and do any business by mail.
I had an unfortunate experience with my son, who's at Otago
University. I sent him a Christmas card with 50 bucks in it, I
know you're not meant to, for his birthday.
He gave me a hard time three months later about the fact that
he had not got any acknowledgement of his birthday.
And when I told him I'd sent it in the mail, he said, "Dad, you're just so out
of it. Nobody, none of us students, ever check the mailbox.
What era do you live in, Dad?" And I think that is an
increasing problem. There are estimates that there is now as many
25% of the population who do all their business by
email. Now, the second point in my submission,
is around the issue
of the way in which we promote the elections.
We know that participation since I've been a candidate in elections, and that's
been a wee while, I go way back to 1983, a wee while ago.
At that time, our participation in local elections was over 60%.
We're now under 40%.
One of the reasons for that, that you need to be upfront about,
is that in our parliamentary elections, the Electoral Commission
spends five times as much per voter
on promoting participation in the election.
You'll all be familiar with the orange man and his dog.
And it's not only that five times as much is being spent on
promoting elections, it is so much more effective to do
that at a national level. Having every one
of our 83 local authorities running their own little
campaign to tell you to vote is it's not only that we're not spending
very much, we're spending it very inefficiently.
And that is the key flaw. We did a big piece of work as
local government, New Zealand. The Auckland Council, even though they're not
members of LGNZ, were part of that work, and there's actually
a really simple answer.
Have the Electoral Commission run our local elections
in exactly the same way as they run the parliamentary elections.
It has greater integrity and greater professionalism.
We've just experienced problems in the last election with the two private
companies dropping the ball. I have to say, as somebody who's
participated in both parliamentary and local elections,
there is a far higher level of professionalism and
integrity in the way it's done by the Electoral Commission.
And further, is that the two-week period
of in-person voting that is provided now with
parliamentary elections is a very simple way in which to do our
council elections. I have to say, I was quite disappointed
to get a letter from the Minister of Local Government yesterday in
response to LGNZ's working group,
saying no, that the government has no interest in doing it.
Even doing a trial, and we had suggested that they choose an area
like a Gisborne or a Taranaki and give the Electoral Commission a trial
run at doing in-person voting in that way.
Look, I do understand the government's under enormous financial pressure and has
got lots of priorities, but I do think the
committee needs to emphasize the importance of our grassroots
democracy.
And in my view, time is running out on postal
voting.
Okay. Your Worship, I've got three questions, but I'm going to hold them
over. What I'd like to do is bring in your two colleagues, and then
we're going to have our serious questions.
So welcome,
Your Worship. Welcome, Ms. Saltz.
Do you just want to capture on the following bit? But I've got lots of questions.
We've all read your submissions. We're dying to ask you questions.
So maybe just highlight one or two really important aspects, please.
Yes. Good morning to the select committee. Thank you for having us here today.
I'm Reid Stoltz, the president of Local Government New Zealand, Mayor of
Gisborne, and you've just heard from Mayor Nick Smith.
He also chaired our LGNZ Electoral Reform Working Group,
and we also have Simon Randall, LGNZ Director of Policy, with
us here today. We take our submission as read.
I thought I would just highlight a few issues and then we are more than happy
to answer your questions.
We have concerns about reports of people being moved to the dormant
roll with no clear reason why.
We welcome further investigation in what happened in these
cases.
Absolutely.
The Electoral Commission should be required to provide more
information to residents about the importance of updating their
enrollment details and what is likely to occur if a
resident fails to update their details within the required
timeframe.
Next, we agree with the Independent Electoral Review panel's final report,
which noted the issues of increasing disinformation and
misinformation around elections, and welcome the committee
exploring how this could be addressed in future
local elections. We also agree with the review's view
that education and community engagement are the best
tools we have to address it at this moment, but this will require
resource as well as coordination.
And then we do share concerns about the high number of special
votes not counted this election. This should be further
investigated and its causes addressed.
And lastly from me, the Local Electoral Act 2001
should be amended to require that electoral
officers make reasonable efforts to inform
residents whose special votes are classified as invalid
that their votes did not count. I'll hand over to
Mayor Nick, if there's anything you wanted to add, and then we are more than happy
to answer questions.
Nothing further to add. Acknowledge Simon Randall, our official from
LGNZ, who was-
Mm-hmm
... very involved in the work of the working
group.
All right. So first question up, Celia Wade-Brown.
Kia ora. Thank you for continuing to prosecute
this issue about running local
government elections centrally.
I did have a quest-- and I'm sorry that it doesn't look like
that'll happen
under this government. But
looking at closer alignment with how central
government elections are run,
there has been an inconsistency in the past in that
when central government you're allowed to enroll and vote on
voting day, in local government you could only enroll
up to the day before.
Now central government has rolled it back further
to two weeks before.
Do you have
a view as to when enrollment for local government should
close?
It was not an issue that was discussed by the working party
on electoral reform. It's one of those detailed issues where there's a
balance from the point of view of the electoral officer or the Electoral
Commission running the election.
It does make it so much more administrably
simple if you has a close-off date some period before the
elections. But it's also true that it has the
downside of potentially cutting out some people.
The only view I think we would collectively take is whatever the
rule,
make them consistent for both. New Zealanders are
creatures of habit, and the more they see
similarity between the way in which they do their parliamentary
elections and their council elections, the easier you'll make it
for participants and for voters.
Okay. Next question, Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Well, just a quick comment and then a question.
You might want to look at this committee's own report on the 2023
election in relation to the dormant roll issue, but you need to provide
specific examples to the Electoral Commission.
I'm sorry, but yeah, that's what I think would be most
useful so they can actually then investigate it.
But my question is for you, Mayor Smith,
and I'm assuming that, I just want to make sure I'm clear, if we did
go to having the Electoral Commission running local body elections,
councilors would be happy to pay for that service in some way?
What we suggested in our report-
Yeah
... and there's a detailed section on that, is that the
local government community would have a representative on
the Electoral Commission, so there's that extra expertise.
There are a few issues of which are a bit different with wards and other
things. And that the Electoral Commission, with the approval of Cabinet, would
then levy local authorities-
Right
... for the cost of running the local elections.
We didn't go right down to whether there should be any government support or not.
I personally have a view that there should be. You know the re-enrollment function?
There's a benefit for that being done jointly for both.
And so where there are costs that benefit both the parliamentary
elections and the local elections, then there should be a
fair sharing of that cost between central and local government.
Great. Thank you. And just one minor follow-up supplementary.
And then the idea of
a centrally run advertising campaign.
You would see that though, just being that-
Sure
... one, make sure you're enrolled, and two, the elections are on.
That kind of view-
Yes
... how that would look? Yeah.
I would again make it as similar as possible.
Yep.
One of the issues we identified in our inquiry, why are people not
voting? Post is stuffed. The information campaigns are four, but there
is a third point that I'd bring to your attentionAnd that is
poor information about candidates.
One of the problems in local body elections, and while you'll all have differences
of view about political parties, political parties do the country a great
service in the sense of putting their hoardings up everywhere so people notice
there's an election on, and giving information about candidates.
In our research work that was done as part of it, we found that there was
very poor information available to voters on
candidates. We do believe that the Electoral Commission should
run a national website. You know how you get the little booklet
with the information that reads like motherhood and apple pie about all us people
that stand for in local board elections?
Well, there are recommendations in our report that we would also have the Electoral
Commission providing basic information about candidates that
was easily accessible on the net. We do think the internet
is a good place for information spreading.
We don't think, because of the security concerns, it's a good place for
doing the voting.
Yeah, right. Now, question from Mr. Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair, and thanks, your worships, for the submission this
morning. Just on the point about the national campaign or
advertising. Is there anything stopping LGNZ
implementing that with the agreement of members now,
or contracting the Electoral Commission on behalf of its members
to undertake that sort of marketing campaign?
A wonderful question, Carl. The first thing is the Electoral
Commission and its act does not allow it to do it right now.
Now, if you were going to do it, the orange man and
his dog have almost got a place in New Zealand
history, they've become so prominent.
So their law does not allow them to contract with local
government to do it. Now, it is true, Carl, that what we could do... Sorry, Mr.
Bates. We could-
Mm-hmm
... set up and come together through an organization.
You know the level of pressure there is on councils around their
finances.
Yeah.
Your own government is putting pressure on us with respect to rates caps.
LGNZ and, and Rate... Rehat is involved in a reset
of LGNZ. We've lost significant members like Auckland and Christchurch.
There isn't the... In my view, there's a bigger job for
LGNZ to resupport its base before it could go down that
track. And you're always going to have the difficulty
of freeloaders. That is, I'm a council that says, "I'm under rates payer
pressure. Let the big council fund the national campaign for the get
out the vote. Why should I pay?" What you could do as a
compromise option would be to provide for what we use in the
commodity services levy type area, and enable local
government, through LGNZ, to levy all councils for such
a campaign. All that seems highly inefficient.
You've got the orange man, you've got the dog, you've got the Electoral Commission.
Let's just put them to work for local elections.
Thanks. To clarify, I think I was referring to the ability to
license the marketing activity.
Understand.
And that
you mentioned you're already spending money on the get out the vote, and
if you pooled that money for your marketing campaign nationally.
So it wouldn't ne- necessarily be new money.
Can I give you the, can I give you the numbers?
Yeah.
Local councils on average spend 50 cents per voter
on the get out the vote campaign. The Electoral Commission spends
$3. Guess what? Why have you got far better participation in
parliamentary elections? You s- you get what you pay for.
Right. Hey, thank you everyone for joining us this morning. Very helpful.
Great submissions, and nice to have those guys.
Thanks, Clint.
Thank you.
Enjoy your council meetings.
Thanks.
Righto. Now, members, we are going back
into private session.